hey it's me Destin welcome back to
smarter every day so in the Olympics the
most athletic team always wins right
no it's actually more complicated than
that because there's physical objects in
the Olympics now the team that is able
to manipulate these physical objects
better than the other team usually wins
for example curling this curling stone
is very heavy and if you can figure out
how to manipulate it across the ice
better than the other team you will win
so physics is a huge deal and a
knowledge of physics is very important
so today on smarter every day we're
going to start a three-part series on
equipment used in the Olympics and how
it interacts with the world around it
today we're going to focus on ice skates
there are three major types of ice
skates used in the Olympics the figure
skate the hockey skate and the speed
skate this is my new friend Glen he's a
bigger skating coach it's really awesome
so everyone already knows the angular
momentum trick right
so large moment of inertia bringing it
in small moment of inertia that's pretty
awesome so show me your skates what
makes you be able to do that because I
mean I would mess up because of the toe
pick so where are you actually rotating
I'm actually spinning backwards my blade
is spinning backwards and I'm spinning
on a small area we call the ball of the
foot also my bottom toe pick is touching
the ice so it's allowing me to put
forward pressure down without sliding
forward like I would on a hockey skate
so that's how you're able to keep from
falling backwards right yeah I'm not
really getting it he's saying he's
rotating about this point but he's
dragging that toothpick clearly this is
a good excuse to break out the fan
okay now this is making sense you see I
used to think that they pivoted on one
spot under the ball of the foot looks
like I was wrong they're actually
skating backwards and he's dragging that
toe pick to maintain his balance that's
pretty cool
all right it's time to move on to jumps
okay Glenn's going to show us three of
the main jumps the bigger skinny here's
the waltz jump the South cow and the
flip
there's a gouge where you left the ice
might open push off the toe pick and
then there's another gouge landed on
might open ah can I go down to my blade
so I'm pushing off the eye and I'm
landing with the toe pick with my toe
hitting first and then my blade okay
cleanse gonna do a jump and he's gonna
land with his toe kick which is how they
always land
it adds stability
it's in the landing of these jumps when
the design of the figure skates really
start to show you can spike yourself
down into the ice with a toe pick and
then you slowly rock the blade down in
fact the curvature of the bottom of the
blade is called the rocker after it's
planted firmly on the ground you'll
notice it doesn't immediately move away
the skater imparts the momentum from his
opposite leg back into his lower foot in
many moves so it's a three-step process
spiked plant move interesting but a
question I have is that if the bottom is
rounded how do you sharpen a round blade
so this seems like a good opportunity to
move from the figure skate to the hockey
skate so let's meet my friend Nick who's
the director of hockey operations at UAH
so you're going to show me I'm sorry
second time yeah sorry dudes tell me the
blade how does it work so the blades
here if you look it's two separate I
just felt drawn up here okay
blade actually so this is a
cross-section looks like that no way a
lot of people think it looks like that
but it's actually there's a hollow in
here really yep can we see the sharpener
yeah I like the named blade master this
is the wheel which actually sharpens
escape how do you hold the blade up
there is this a sled or something slider
everybody's got their own little
nickname for it okay and so then if the
wheel returning you would bring that in
there let me focus okay I can see that
curvature that you're talking about can
you go closer if you would to the wheel
so that's the radius of a skate 33 days
1/2 5/8 I'm not sure I understand you're
saying you're saying this hollow right
here that some of them will look like
that someone was like that so more like
that this is completely eye-opening to
me I had no idea that ice skates had two
different working edges so why would a
player prefer a deeper hollow versus a
shallower one well think about it if you
have a shallow hollow you're able to sit
on top of the ice and glide very easily
so this is very good for speed but if
you have a deep hollow your points are
gonna cut down into the ice and plow so
you'll go a lot slower however you'll
get much better grip and if there's one
thing a hockey player needs it's good
grip have you ever seen him stop and
change directions
so I asked a couple of hockey players to
show me how this double edge is used to
stop on Highness
behold the awesomeness of physics that
crazy look at what he's doing he's
controlling that edge and scratching the
top layer of ice off but he's doing it
in such a way that it's converting that
shear energy into power which he's using
to decelerate some people want to
believe that hockey players are just
dumb brutes but I'm not buying it I told
this player I wanted him to stop on a
very specific spot on the height so I
can zoom in with a phantom and catch the
ice spray and he did it on the very
first try can you imagine the math
that's going on in his brain in order to
automate this feedback loop he's
constantly sensing his deceleration and
somehow his brains converting that
information to signals to control the
angle of his skates and better the exact
amount of ice that he's shearing off to
complicate matters he's got ice in
between him and his target and he has to
anticipate they told about an impulse
left in that ice so he can stop exactly
where he wants to let's ask him to see
if he can explain exactly what he's
doing because I'm pretty sure hockey
players are physics geniuses he ain't
gotta take a glove off man Ben thank you
very much do you have any like if you
had to say anything about that hockey
stuff how exactly do you do are you are
you just trying to find the balance
so you want to find the inside edge
you're trying to find that edge on the
ice and just a fine so like a noob
somebody's just learning how to do that
with a dagger across the ice
yes did you just hit that puck without
looking he just hit a puck and you hit
it without looking yep I'm right there
geniuses so if we want grip for a hockey
blade
we don't want it for a speed skate right
which might explain why speed skaters
are always falling this was
counterintuitive to me but the bottom of
a speed skate isn't pointy it's actually
a flat sharp 90 degree angle to see
speed skaters in action let's go to the
Pettit National Ice Center in Milwaukee
and check out the US Junior long track
championships okay look at how the
skater starts off the line you see that
open stance they do this because ice
skate friction is asymmetrical they
glide easily going forward but they dig
in on the sides so to propel themselves
skaters have to push off the sides of
the blade the larger this angle alpha is
the harder they can push that's why they
line up with their foot at almost a 90
degree angle to the direction of skate
speed skates are flat which means each
individual stride has to be perfectly
level when the foot hits the ice this
can be a problem because when you extend
your ankle the blade tries to come up
off the ice the solution to this is
called a clap skate clap skates allow a
long track skater to keep their blade on
the ice longer into the stride I'll let
Adam explain the clap starts to come out
I see pictures here just gonna be wise
back like that and so that extra push
that makes the flap if you
contacts on the ice
and you can get a lot more power I'll
just talk about ice-skating and we
didn't even explain why it's slippery in
the first place so there's this thing
called friction melting if you're moving
something along ice it creates this
really thin layer of water think like
nanometers thick that is why you can
slip on ice so easily the coefficient of
friction can be defined by this equation
it's very interesting okay couple more
things you might be interested in number
one we've been making infographics and
all these winter sports you can go
download those and share them with
whoever you like also I'd like to thank
the sponsor those may do crazy things
like try to explain sports I don't
really understand so that's all you can
support smarter every day by going to
audible.com/smarter to get a free
audiobook whatever you i've got
thousands of titles i used an audible
before they ask to be a sponsor for
smarter every day so i'm more than happy
to suggest that view audible.com slash
smarter smarter every day will get
credit and that'll help us move towards
crazy stuff like this speaking of more
crazy stuff like this if you would like
to see more videos on winter olympic
sports the next couple of videos I'm
gonna try to get them out pretty quick
are the things like curling and other
stuff like that it's pretty cool anyway
for our sponsor audible.com slash
smarter and if your subscription
consider that
deston get smarter every day thanks for
listening to me I appreciate that
everyone why are you putting your hands
out all the time why do I always say
figure skaters do that because my coach
told me to over and out my balance
[Music]
my arms to rotate
myself and to be a little more dramatic
you gotta have a little finesse to it
right it's awesome
[Music]